[🏠 Home](../../../README.md) <br/>
[Node.js Home](../notes/)

---

<h1 style="text-align: center">Introduction to Node.js</h1>

## Index
- [Index](#index)
- [1. What is Node.js?](#1-what-is-nodejs)
- [2. What Can Node.js Do?](#2-what-can-nodejs-do)
- [3. Node.js vs Browser](#3-nodejs-vs-browser)
- [3. What is a Node.js File?](#3-what-is-a-nodejs-file)
- [4. Use cases and advantages](#4-use-cases-and-advantages)
- [5. History and Evolution of Node.js](#5-history-and-evolution-of-nodejs)
- [6. Event-driven, non-blocking I/O model](#6-event-driven-non-blocking-io-model)
- [7 Installation and Setup](#7-installation-and-setup)
	- [7.1 Installing Node.js](#71-installing-nodejs)
	- [7.2 Using Node REPL](#72-using-node-repl)
	- [7.3 Managing Node.js versions (nvm)](#73-managing-nodejs-versions-nvm)
	- [7.4 Hello World in Node.js](#74-hello-world-in-nodejs)

---

## 1. What is Node.js?

- Node.js is an open source server environment
- Node.js is free
- Node.js runs on various platforms (Windows, Linux, Unix, Mac OS X, etc.)
- Node.js uses JavaScript on the server

Node.js is an open-source, cross-platform runtime environment that allows developers to execute JavaScript code on the server side. It is built on Chrome's V8 JavaScript engine, enabling the development of scalable and efficient applications.

**Key Features of Node.js:**

- Asynchronous and Event-Driven: Node.js operates on a non-blocking architecture, which allows it to handle multiple operations concurrently.
- Single Programming Language: JavaScript can be used for both frontend and backend development, simplifying the development process.
- Rich Ecosystem: Node.js has a vast library of modules available through npm (Node Package Manager), which aids in building applications quickly.

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

## 2. What Can Node.js Do?

- Node.js can generate dynamic page content
- Node.js can create, open, read, write, delete, and close files on the server
- Node.js can collect form data
- Node.js can add, delete, modify data in your database

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

## 3. Node.js vs Browser

1. **Node.js vs Browser JavaScript:**

   - Both environments use JavaScript, but they're designed for different purposes.
   - Browsers run JavaScript to manipulate web pages and interact with users, while Node.js runs JavaScript on servers to handle backend operations.
   - The ability to use JavaScript for both frontend and backend (full-stack) development allows developers to leverage their skills across the entire web application stack, increasing productivity and code reuse.

2. **Ecosystem differences:**

   - Browser JavaScript heavily relies on the Document Object Model (DOM) for manipulating web page content and structure. 
   - It also uses Web Platform APIs like localStorage and Cookies for client-side functionality.
   - Node.js lacks these browser-specific features but provides its own set of APIs. For example, it offers modules for file system operations, network communication, and operating system interactions, which are not available in browsers for security reasons.

3. **Environment control:**

   - In Node.js development, you typically know exactly which version your application will run on. This allows you to use the latest JavaScript features supported by that version without worrying about compatibility issues.
   - Browser-based development must consider a wide range of browser types and versions used by end-users. This often requires more careful feature selection or the use of polyfills to ensure consistent behavior across different browsers.

4. **JavaScript version support:**

   - Node.js generally supports the latest ECMAScript features shortly after they're standardized. This allows developers to use modern JavaScript syntax and features without additional tools.
   - Browser support for new JavaScript features can lag behind, especially considering older browsers still in use. To use newer features while maintaining broad compatibility, developers often use transpilers like Babel to convert modern JavaScript code into an older, more widely supported version.

5. **Module systems:**

   - Node.js has long used the CommonJS module system (with `require()` statements) but now also supports ES Modules (using `import/export` syntax). This flexibility allows developers to choose the module system that best fits their project or transition between them.
   - Browsers are moving towards native support for ES Modules, but this transition is still ongoing. This shift is bringing more alignment between browser and Node.js development practices regarding how code is organized and shared between files.


**Key takeaway:**

- While JavaScript is the common language, the contexts in which it runs (browser vs. server) lead to significant differences in available APIs, features, and development approaches. 
- Understanding these differences is crucial for effective development in both environments.

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

## 3. What is a Node.js File?

- Node.js can generate dynamic page content
- Node.js can create, open, read, write, delete, and close files on the server
- Node.js can collect form data
- Node.js can add, delete, modify data in your database

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

## 4. Use cases and advantages

**Common Use Cases:**

- **Web Applications:** Creating server-side applications and RESTful APIs
- **Real-time Applications:** Chat applications, gaming servers, and collaboration tools (e.g., Google Docs).
- **Microservices:** Building microservices architectures for scalable applications.
- **Data Streaming:** Processing data in real-time, such as media streaming.

**Advantages:**

- **Performance:** High throughput due to its non-blocking I/O model.
- **Scalability:** Easily handle many connections simultaneously.
- **Community Support:** A large community provides support and resources.

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

## 5. History and Evolution of Node.js

- **2009:** Node.js was created by Ryan Dahl. Its initial goal was to create a framework for building scalable network applications.
- **2010:** The first version of Node.js (0.1.0) was released.
- **2012:** The Node.js Foundation was formed to foster the development and maintenance of the project.
- **2020:** Node.js 14 was released, introducing new features like optional chaining and nullish coalescing.

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

## 6. Event-driven, non-blocking I/O model

Node.js uses an event-driven, non-blocking I/O model that allows it to handle multiple connections simultaneously without waiting for operations to complete. This is accomplished through the event loop, which manages the execution of asynchronous operations.

**Key Concepts:**

- **Event Loop:** The core mechanism in Node.js that allows it to perform non-blocking operations. It continuously checks for events and executes callbacks when the events are ready.
- **Callbacks:** Functions that are passed as arguments to other functions and are invoked once a specific task is completed.

---

## 7 Installation and Setup

### 7.1 Installing Node.js

Node.js can be installed in various ways depending on your operating system. The most common way is by downloading the installer from the official website, but you can also use package managers like nvm to manage multiple versions of Node.js.

**Method 1: Installing via the Official Node.js Website**

1. Go to the [official Node.js website](https://nodejs.org/).
2. Choose the LTS (Long-Term Support) version for more stability or the latest version for newer features.
3. Download and run the installer for your operating system (Windows, macOS, or Linux).
4. The installer includes both Node.js and npm (Node Package Manager), which you'll use to install other libraries and dependencies.

**Method 2: Installing Node.js using Package Managers**

- macOS:

```
brew install node
```

- Linux(Ubuntu):

```
sudo apt update
sudo apt install nodejs npm
```

- Windows: Install using [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org/install):

```
choco install nodejs
```

To check if Node.js is installed successfully: `node -v`.

To check if npm is installed successfully: `npm -v`.

---

### 7.2 Using Node REPL

The Node.js REPL is an interactive shell where you can run JavaScript code directly and get immediate feedback. It is useful for testing and debugging small code snippets.

Using the Node REPL:
1. Open your terminal or command prompt.
2. Type node and press Enter. This will start the Node.js REPL.
3. You can now type JavaScript expressions, and Node.js will evaluate and return the result.

```bash
$ node
Welcome to Node.js v14.17.0.
Type ".help" for more information.
> 2 + 2
4
> const name = 'Node.js'
undefined
> console.log(`Hello, ${name}!`)
Hello, Node.js!
undefined
```

---

### 7.3 Managing Node.js versions (nvm)

`nvm` (Node Version Manager) is a command-line tool that allows you to install, update, and switch between multiple versions of Node.js. This is especially useful when working on different projects that require different Node.js versions.

**Installing NVM:**

- **MacOS & Linux:** run the following command in your terminal

```
curl -o- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nvm-sh/nvm/v0.39.1/install.sh | bash
```

- **Windows:** Use [nav-windows](https://github.com/coreybutler/nvm-windows)

After installation, close and reopen your terminal, and verify that nvm is installed: `$ nvm --version`

Using NVM to Manage Node.js Versions:

1. **Install a specific version of Node.js:**

```
nvm install 14
```

2. List all installed versions:

```
nvm ls
```

3. Switch to a different Node.js version:

```
nvm use 14
```

4. Set a default Node.js version:

```
nvm alias default 14
```

---


### 7.4 Hello World in Node.js

**Project Structure:**

```
hello-world/
└── app.js
```

**Steps:**

1. **Create a new project directory:**

```
mkdir hello-world
cd hello-world
```

2. **Initialize the project (optional):** Run the following command to create a `package.json` file, which will help manage dependencies in larger projects.

```
npm init -y
```

This creates a default `package.json` file.

3. **Create the main application file:** Inside the `hello-world` directory, create a new file named `app.js`.

4. **Write the "Hello World" code:** Open the `app.js` file and add the following code:

```js
// app.js
console.log('Hello, World!');
```

5. **Run the application:** In the terminal, navigate to the `hello-world` directory and run the following command:

```
node app.js
```

You should see the following output:

```
Hello, World!
```

---



---

[🏠 Home](../../../README.md) <br/>
[Node.js Home](../notes/)