<div style="display: flex; justify-content: space-between">
<a href="../C++.md">Home</a>
</div>

<hr/>

<h1 style = "text-align:center">11. Union</h1>


- A union is a data type in C++ that allows you to store multiple different types of data in the same memory location. 
- This can be useful when you need to save memory or when you need to be able to switch between different types of data quickly.
- Unions are declared using the ***union*** keyword and a list of member variables. 
- The member variables can be of any type, but the size of the union will be equal to the size of the largest member variable. 
- This is because all of the member variables share the same memory location.

**Example:** 
```
union Sample {
    char a;
    float b;
    int c;
};
```
Once declared, instances of unions can then be created and used inside main (or other functions) using the following syntax.

To declare an instance of a union, we must start with the keyword union, followed by the name of the union we're using, which in this case is Sample. Lastly, we need a name for the union instance we are creating, which in this case is u_name.

Once we have initialized u_name, we can then use the . operator to access the variables inside Sample in the following manner:
```
int main() {
    union Sample u_name;
    u_name.a = 'c';
    u_name.b = 87.99;
    u_name.c = 103;
}
```

So far, our implementation of union seems no different from a struct in C++. However, the important difference is that all the variables we initialized inside Sample share the same memory space.

u_name.a, u_name.b, and u_name.c would all share the same memory space. This means we could efficiently only use one variable at a given time.

In the example above, when we initialize u_name.a to 'c', all the other variables will point to the same memory location and thus contain the equivalent of 'c' as well.

Similarly, in the next line, when we assign u_name.b the value 87.99, we would in reality be updating all other variables as well.

**Usage**

Generally, unions are useful when you want to store data that could be one of multiple data types. A union could vary the data type of given data as required.

It would be considered a bad practice to use all variables for a given ***union***. Suppose we have some data that should be a ***char***. In the example above, we would utilize ***a*** since it is of type ***char***. Once ***a*** is assigned a value, ***b*** and ***c*** would essentially contain garbage values and should not be used unless the data type for our said data needs to be changed to either a ***float*** or an ***int***.






<div style="display: flex; justify-content: space-between">
<a href="../C++.md">Home</a>
</div>