[🏠 Home](../../../../../README.md) <br/>
[MongoDB Home](../MongoDB.md) <br/>
[Previous ➡️ MDB - Introduction](./1.%20MDB%20-%20Introduction.md) <br/>
[Next ➡️ MDB - CURD Operations](./3.%20MDB%20-%20CURD%20Operation.md)
---

<h1>2. MongoDB - Query API</h1>

---

The MongoDB Query API is the mechanism that you use to interact with your data.

The Query API comprises two ways to query data in MongoDB:

1. CRUD Operations
2. Aggregation pipelines

You can use the Query API to perform:

1. **Adhoc queries**: with `mongosh`, **Compass** , **VSCode** or a **MongoDB driver**.
2. **Data transformations**: Use aggregation pipelines to reshape your data and perform calculations.
3. **Document join support**: Use $lookup and $unionWith to combine data from different collections.
4. **Graph and geospatial queries**: Use operators such as `$geoWithin` and `$geoNear` to analyze geospatial data and `$graphLookup` for graph data.
5. **Full-text search**: Use the `$search` stage to perform efficient text search on your data.
6. **Semantic search**: Use the `$vectorSearch` stage to perform semantic search on your data.
7. **Indexing**: Improve your MongoDB query performance by using the correct index type for your data architecture.
8. **On-demand materialized views**: Use `$out` and `$merge` to create materialized views on common queries.
9. **Time series analysis**: Query and aggregate your time-stamped data with time series collections.

---
[Previous ➡️ MDB - Introduction](./1.%20MDB%20-%20Introduction.md) <br/>
[Next ➡️ MDB - CURD Operations](./3.%20MDB%20-%20CURD%20Operation.md) <br/>
[MongoDB Home](../MongoDB.md) <br/>
[🏠 Home](../../../../../README.md) <br/>