[🏠 Home](../../../../../README.md) <br/>
[MongoDB Home](../MongoDB.md) <br/>
[Previous ⬅️ MDB - Query API](./3.%20MDB%20-%20CURD%20Operation.md) <br/>
[Next ➡️ MDB - Update Operations]()

---

<h1>4. MongoDB - Query Operations</h1>

## Index
- [Index](#index)
- [Comparison](#comparison)
	- [1. `$eq`](#1-eq)
	- [2. `$ne`](#2-ne)
	- [3.  `$gt`](#3--gt)
	- [4.  `$gte`](#4--gte)
	- [5.  `$lt`](#5--lt)
	- [6.  `$lte`](#6--lte)
	- [7.  `$in`](#7--in)
- [Logical](#logical)
	- [1. `$and`](#1-and)
	- [2. `$or`](#2-or)
	- [3. `$nor`](#3-nor)
	- [4. `$not`](#4-not)
- [Evaluation](#evaluation)
	- [1. `$regex`](#1-regex)
	- [2. `$text`](#2-text)
	- [3. `$where`](#3-where)

---

There are many query operators that can be used to compare and reference document fields.

## Comparison

The following operators can be used in queries to compare values:

1. `$eq`: Values are equal
2. `$ne`: Values are not equal
3. `$gt`: Value is greater than another value
4. `$gte`: Value is greater than or equal to another value
5. `$lt`: Value is less than another value
6. `$lte`: Value is less than or equal to another value
7. `$in`: Value is matched within an array

### 1. `$eq`

`$eq`: Values are equal

**Example:** Find posts where the category is exactly "News".

```js
db.posts.find({ category: { $eq: "News" } });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

### 2. `$ne`

`$ne`: Values are not equal

Example: Find posts where the category is not "News".

```js
db.posts.find({ category: { $ne: "News" } });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

### 3.  `$gt`

`$gt:` Value is greater than another value

**Example:** Find posts with more than 1 like.

```js
db.posts.find({ likes: { $gt: 1 } });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

### 4.  `$gte`

`$gte`: Value is greater than or equal to another value

**Example:** Find posts with 2 or more likes.

```js
db.posts.find({ likes: { $gte: 2 } });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

### 5.  `$lt`

`$lt`: Value is less than another value

**Example:** Find posts with fewer than 3 likes.

```js
db.posts.find({ likes: { $lt: 3 } });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

### 6.  `$lte`

`$lte`: Value is less than or equal to another value

**Example:** Find posts with 1 or fewer likes.

```js
db.posts.find({ likes: { $lte: 1 } });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

### 7.  `$in`

`$in`: Value is matched within an array

**Example:** Find posts where the tags include either "news" or "technology".

```js
db.posts.find({ tags: { $in: ["news", "technology"] } });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

## Logical

The following operators can logically compare multiple queries.

1. `$and`: Returns documents where both queries match
2. `$or`: Returns documents where either query matches
3. `$nor`: Returns documents where both queries fail to match
4. `$not`: Returns documents where the query does not match

### 1. `$and`

`$and`: Returns documents where both queries match

**Example:** Find posts where the category is "News" and the number of likes is greater than 0.

```js
db.posts.find({ $and: [{ category: "News" }, { likes: { $gt: 0 } }] });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

### 2. `$or`

`$or`: Returns documents where either query matches

**Example:** Find posts where the category is "News" or the number of likes is greater than 5.

```js
db.posts.find({ $or: [{ category: "News" }, { likes: { $gt: 5 } }] });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

### 3. `$nor`

`$nor`: Returns documents where both queries fail to match

**Example:** Find posts where the category is not "News" and the number of likes is not greater than 5.

```js
db.posts.find({ $nor: [{ category: "News" }, { likes: { $gt: 5 } }] });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

### 4. `$not`

`$not`: Returns documents where the query does not match

**Example:** Find posts where the category is not "News".

```js
db.posts.find({ category: { $not: { $eq: "News" } } });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

## Evaluation

The following operators assist in evaluating documents.

1. `$regex`: Allows the use of regular expressions when evaluating field values
2. `$text`: Performs a text search
3. `$where`: Uses a JavaScript expression to match documents

### 1. `$regex`

`$regex`: Allows the use of regular expressions when evaluating field values

**Example:** Find posts where the title starts with "Post".

```js
db.posts.find({ title: { $regex: /^Post/ } });
```

**Example:** Find posts where the body contains the word "post" (case insensitive).

```js
db.posts.find({ body: { $regex: /post/i } });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

### 2. `$text`

`$text`: Performs a text search

**Example:** Ensure the collection has a text index on relevant fields (e.g., title and body).

```js
db.posts.createIndex({ title: "text", body: "text" });
```

**Example:** Find posts that mention the word "post".

```js
db.posts.find({ $text: { $search: "post" } });
```

**Example:** Find posts with an exact phrase "Post Title".

```js
db.posts.find({ $text: { $search: "\"Post Title\"" } });
```

---

[⬆️ Back to TOP ⬆️](#index)

### 3. `$where`

`$where`: Uses a JavaScript expression to match documents

**Example:** Find posts where the `likes` field is greater than `0` using a JavaScript condition.

```js
db.posts.find({ $where: "this.likes > 0" });
```

**Example:** Find posts where the length of the `tags` array is greater than `1`.

```js
db.posts.find({ $where: "this.tags.length > 1" });
```

**Note:** Using `$where` can be slower and less secure than other operators, as it evaluates JavaScript code on the server side. Use it only when necessary.

---

[🏠 Home](../../../../../README.md) <br/>
[MongoDB Home](../MongoDB.md) <br/>
[Previous ⬅️ MDB - Query API](./3.%20MDB%20-%20CURD%20Operation.md) <br/>
[Next ➡️ MDB - Update Operations](./5.%20MDB%20-%20Update%20Operations.md)
