[🏠 Home](../../../README.md) <br/>
[🍵 Java Home](../Java.md)

<hr/>

<h1 style="text-align: center">18. Java Packages & API</h1>

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Built-in Packages](#built-in-packages)
  - [Importing a Class](#importing-a-class)
  - [Importing a Package](#importing-a-package)
- [User Defined Packages](#user-defined-packages)
- [Java Packages and APIs](#java-packages-and-apis)

<hr/>

## Introduction
A package in Java is used to group related classes. Think of it as a folder in a file directory. We use packages to avoid name conflicts, and to write a better maintainable code. Packages are divided into two categories:

- Built-in Packages (packages from the Java API)
- User-defined Packages (create your own packages)

## Built-in Packages
The Java API is a library of prewritten classes, that are free to use, included in the Java Development Environment.

The library contains components for managing input, database programming, and much much more. The complete list can be found at Oracles website: [https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/).

The library is divided into packages and classes. Meaning you can either import a single class (along with its methods and attributes), or a whole package that contain all the classes that belong to the specified package.

To use a class or a package from the library, you need to use the import keyword:

**Syntax:**
```
import package.name.Class;   // Import a single class
import package.name.*;   // Import the whole package
```
### Importing a Class

If you find a class you want to use, for example, the Scanner class, which is used to get user input, write the following code:

**Example:**
```java
import java.util.Scanner;
```
In the example above, `java.util` is a package, while `Scanner` is a class of the `java.util` package.

To use the `Scanner` class, create an object of the class and use any of the available methods found in the `Scanner` class documentation. In our example, we will use the `nextLine()` method, which is used to read a complete line:

```java
import java.util.Scanner;

class MyClass {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    Scanner myObj = new Scanner(System.in);
    System.out.println("Enter username");

    String userName = myObj.nextLine();
    System.out.println("Username is: " + userName);
  }
}
```

### Importing a Package

There are many packages to choose from. In the previous example, we used the `Scanner` class from the `java.util` package. This package also contains date and time facilities, random-number generator and other utility classes.

To import a whole package, end the sentence with an asterisk sign (`*`). The following example will import ALL the classes in the `java.util` package:

**Example:**
```java
import java.util.*; // import the java.util package 

class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    Scanner myObj = new Scanner(System.in);
    String userName;
    
    // Enter username and press Enter
    System.out.println("Enter username"); 
    userName = myObj.nextLine();   
       
    System.out.println("Username is: " + userName);        
  }
}
```

## User Defined Packages

To create your own package, you need to understand that Java uses a file system directory to store them. Just like folders on your computer:

**Example:**
```
└── root
  └── mypack
    └── MyPackageClass.java
```

To create a package, use the `package` keyword:

**Example:**
```java
Result Size: 683 x 579
package mypack;

class MyPackageClass { 
  public static void main(String[] args) { 
    System.out.println("This is my package!"); 
  } 
}
```

Save the file as MyPackageClass.java, and compile it:
```
C:\Users\Your Name>javac MyPackageClass.java
```
Then compile the package:
```
C:\Users\Your Name>javac -d . MyPackageClass.java
```

This forces the compiler to create the "mypack" package.

The `-d` keyword specifies the destination for where to save the class file. You can use any directory name, like `c:/user (windows)`, or, if you want to keep the package within the same directory, you can use the dot sign "`.`", like in the example above.

***Note:*** The package name should be written in lower case to avoid conflict with class names.

When we compiled the package in the example above, a new folder was created, called "mypack".

To run the MyPackageClass.java file, write the following:
```
C:\Users\Your Name>java mypack.MyPackageClass
```
The output will be:
```
This is my package!
```

## Java Packages and APIs

There are main 14 packages in java in te JDK v11:
1. `java.applet` - Provides the classes necessary to create an applet and the classes an applet uses to communicate with its applet context.
2. `java.awt` - Contains all of the classes for creating user interfaces and for painting graphics and images.
3. `java.beans` - Contains classes related to developing beans -- components based on the JavaBeans™ architecture.
4. `java.io` - Provides for system input and output through data streams, serialization and the file system.
5. `java.lang` - Provides classes that are fundamental to the design of the Java programming language.
6. `java.math` - Provides classes for performing arbitrary-precision integer arithmetic (BigInteger) and arbitrary-precision decimal arithmetic (BigDecimal).
7. `java.net` - Provides the classes for implementing networking applications.
8. `java.nio` - Defines buffers, which are containers for data, and provides an overview of the other NIO packages.
9. `java.rmi` - Provides the RMI package.
10. `java.security` - Provides the classes and interfaces for the security framework.
11. `java.sql` - Provides the API for accessing and processing data stored in a data source (usually a relational database) using the Java™ programming language.
12. `java.text` - Provides classes and interfaces for handling text, dates, numbers, and messages in a manner independent of natural languages.
13. `java.time` - The main API for dates, times, instants, and durations.
14. `java.util` - Contains the collections framework, some internationalization support classes, a service loader, properties, random number generation, string parsing and scanning classes, base64 encoding and decoding, a bit array, and several miscellaneous utility classes.
15. `javax.accessibility` - Defines a contract between user-interface components and an assistive technology that provides access to those components.
16. `javax.crypto` - Provides the classes and interfaces for cryptographic operations.
17. `javax.swing` - Provides a set of "lightweight" (all-Java language) components that, to the maximum degree possible, work the same on all platforms.

[Link](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/allpackages-index.html)

<hr/>

[🏠 Home](../../../README.md) <br/>
[🍵 Java Home](../Java.md)
